[SWOOSH]
[SHIMMERING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant.
And welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment," your go
to show that offers
practical tips from expert
guests at the end
of every episode,
designed to help you be
more conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
There's a core understanding
in the yoga tradition
that says, where the
mind goes, energy flows.
The science of yogic
meditation also
states that prana, energy,
and chita, or thought,
are two sides of the same coin.
Where one goes,
the other follows.
My guest is a leading
scientific researcher
in the study of meditation
and human potential.
In Dr. Joe Dispenza's
most recent book,
"Becoming Supernatural,"
he shows us
how thoughts trigger biochemical
reactions in the brain, which
then release chemical signals
that cause the body to feel
exactly how we were
just thinking, leaving
us caught in what he calls
the thinking/feeling loop.
Thank you so much
for being here today.
>> Happy to be with you.
>> So being a yoga
teacher for many years,
I'm very interested in
the study of meditation,
and how it actually works,
having felt the effects on it.
Your work is extremely
exciting and interesting.
Will you tell us a little
bit about your experience
of the yoga tradition,
and maybe how
this has fueled
some of the research
that you're doing today?
>> Sure.
I started this whole journey
because I read a book
about yoga early on.
And I was in search of
a greater way to be.
And one thing about
yoga is I couldn't
get my body in the beginning
to do what I wanted it to do.
So it was now something
that I wanted to master.
So being athletic, and then
all of a sudden breaking
from competitive sports and
getting involved in yoga,
I just read everything
I could about it,
and spent so much time
doing a lot of yoga.
And I think we learn a lot
about our bodies when we do it,
intuitively.
But really, for the most part,
it led me to the understanding
that Hatha yoga was the
foundational yoga in schools
of ancient wisdom, where people
came from all walks of life
to break down physical
rigidity in their body
so they could sit for
extended periods of time
and go within so the body
was no longer problematic.
The side effect of
that, of course,
is it produces a lot of
benefits and health changes.
But once we start
settling the body down,
the next thing we have
to address is the mind.
And so if you want to develop
the idea of where you place
your attention is
where you place
your energy, the moment
you have a thought,
and that thought produces
a biochemical reaction
in your brain, and you begin
to feel a certain emotion, when
you feel that emotion,
you begin to think
equal to that
emotional state, which
then keeps firing the same
circuits in your brain
that keeps producing
the same emotions.
And that loop over
time conditions
the body to store that
emotion in it energetically.
So then what happens is
people all of a sudden start
to have energetic
patterns in their body
that have to be broken down.
And so yoga is a great
way of wringing water out
of the washcloth and begin to
create more holism and balance.
So good for the start.
But then you have to
all of a sudden start
to address where your
thoughts and attention goes.
For example, the
stronger the emotion
that you feel from
something in your life,
the more you pay attention
to whatever's causing it.
So then if you can't manage
your emotional state,
then, in a sense, you're giving
your power away to that person
or to that problem, because now
energy is moving away from you.
>> Yeah.
>> At the same time, if you keep
living by the same emotions,
and you keep your attention
on those emotions,
emotions are a
record of the past.
They're chemical residue
from past experiences.
So the more a person puts their
attention on their emotions,
the more they're
thinking in the past.
In other words, if you
can't think greater
than how you feel, or
feelings have become
the means of thinking, and you
believe that your thoughts have
something to do
with your destiny,
then you're thinking
in the past,
and you keep creating
the same life.
So then thoughts are the
language of the brain.
And feelings are the
language of the body.
And how you think and how you
feel creates a state of being.
So then, if you
think about this,
your body is your
unconscious mind.
It doesn't know the difference
between an experience
in your life that creates
an emotion and an emotion
that you can create
by thought alone.
So when people get
caught in these loops,
their body is believing
they're living
in the same past experience
24 hours a day, 7 days a week,
365 days a year.
The body literally becomes
conditioned into the past.
So what does a person do?
They get up.
They go through
the same routine.
They check their cell phone.
They check their texts, their
WhatsApp, their Instagram,
their Facebook.
They take a picture
of their feet.
They post it on Facebook.
They check the news.
They check one email.
They check the other email.
Then they get up, and
they go through a series
of routine behaviors.
And they do that
over and over again.
All of a sudden, they are
programming their body
into a predictable
future based on what
they've done in the past.
So, in a sense, they've lost
their free will to a program.
So then yoga, the act
of moving into an asana
and being present, it takes a
tremendous amount of effort,
once you're
experiencing discomfort
to move your attention
away from that discomfort.
>> Sure.
>> So then most people
run from discomfort.
They don't want to look at it.
But when you're sitting in the
presence of that discomfort,
and you're being
present with it,
you're literally
taking that emotion
that's stored in the body, and
your liberating it as energy.
When you change your breathing,
you change your brainwaves.
And as you begin to
change your brainwaves,
you move beyond the
analytical mind,
which separates the conscious
mind from the subconscious
mind.
Now you're entering
the operating system
where all those
subconscious programs exist.
Now, you can begin to
reprogram the brain and body
so that when you open your
eyes, and you step out
into your life, your brain
and body are changed ahead
of the environment.
So now you're in a
new state of being.
And it only requires two
things, a clear intention
and an elevated emotion.
And that's brain coherence
and heart coherence.
And when you do that properly
now, all of a sudden,
you begin to produce
measurable changes
in your inner world
that starts to be
reflected in your outer world.
The synchronicities,
the coincidences,
the opportunities,
the side effect
in your change of energy, change
in attention begins to open up
possibilities in your life.
And we move from living in
the known, where everything
is predictable, to, all of a
sudden, living in the unknown.
And that's where
the magic happens.
>> Beautiful.
For me this is so
interesting, because this maps
directly onto the kosha
model in the yoga tradition.
You know, the kosha is
the five layers of being,
where we talk about the physical
body, the energetic body.
And then the third
layer of being
is what they would
call the Manomaya
kosha, which is actually
the mind, emotion body.
And it's pretty
fascinating for me
that in texts a couple
thousand years ago
they're already saying that
there's this mind, emotion
body.
Because people sometimes think
that, oh, if I think something,
and I feel something, and
those two concepts match,
then it must be true.
>> Right.
>> But then the next layer
in the koshic model is
the Vijnanamaya kosha, or
the witness consciousness,
which is as a yoga teacher in
my tradition that I've studied
for a long time, that's what
I hear you saying when you say
I'm sitting down, and I'm
getting into a place where I
actually have the ability to
step aside from seeing the mind
and the emotions happen,
and actually say, OK,
I am not just the
mind and the emotions.
There is a part of me.
Witness consciousness
some people call it.
>> Sure.
>> That's actually experiencing
all this that is going on.
But doesn't actually
have to engage.
And then from there,
it seems that this
is kind of where you're
saying, that that's where
the pattern starts to change.
>> Yeah, so so many people now
that are gravitating towards
this work are yoga teachers.
Cause they understand it.
In a physical, gut level,
they experience it.
And there's absolutely
no doubt in my mind
that if you start
wondering who's
doing the observing
of your thoughts,
that's who you really are.
Right?
So 95% of who we are by
the time we're 35 years old
is a set of memorized
behaviors, emotional reactions,
unconscious hardwired
attitudes, beliefs, perceptions
that function like a
subconscious computer program.
So people want to
change, they use
the 5% of their conscious mind.
But it's the body that
has become the mind.
>> Right.
>> So the energy is
stored in the body.
So then how do you get
the mind out of the body?
Right?
How do you begin to
liberate that energy?
And so the moment you
start paying attention
to how you're thinking, the
moment you start thinking
about what you're thinking,
the moment you start observing
how you're behaving, how you
speak, the moment you notice,
my god, I've been feeling
guilt for the last 30 years.
I didn't even think
it was guilt. I
thought it was just how I felt.
>> That's liberating.
>> The moment you do that,
you're no longer the program.
>> Right.
>> You're the consciousness
observing the program.
And we begin to objectify
the subjective self.
That's who you really
are when you're not
immersed in that program.
So the first step
in really beginning
to re-manage your
energy is to be
able to observe those
states of mind and body
without judgment,
without reaction.
And sitting in the presence
of that emotional state,
and not turning on the TV or
getting in your cell phone.
But sitting with it,
and transmuting it
into something else.
So then your personality
creates your personal reality.
And your personality is made up
of how you think, how you act,
and how you feel.
So the present personality
who's watching this show
has created the present
personal reality
called their life,
which means if you want
to create a new personal
reality, a new life,
you have to begin to
change your personality.
And that means then, you got to
light a match in a dark place.
And just because
you have a thought
doesn't necessarily
mean it's true.
So those subconscious thoughts
that are happening behind
the scenes of people's awareness
are always saying, I can't.
It's too hard.
I'll never change.
I'll start tomorrow.
This doesn't feel right.
I want to take my life.
Nobody loves me.
They believe those thoughts.
But those are just
old circuits that have
been stored in their brain.
So then the moment they
start complaining, blaming,
making excuses, and feeling
sorry for themselves,
they all of a sudden
start to see themselves
through the eyes
of someone else.
Or they discover,
my god, I am so
happy being unhappy that
actually I get attention
for being this way.
The moment they
say that, you see,
most people try to create
a new personal reality
as the same personality,
and it doesn't work.
You literally have to
become someone else.
So then the model of
meditation says, OK,
what thoughts do I want to
fire and wire in my brain?
To put my attention behind.
What behaviors do I want
to demonstrate today?
And the act of mental
rehearsal, of closing your eyes,
and rehearsing
your actions begins
to install the
neurological hardware
in your brain to look like
the experience has already
happened.
Now, the brain is no longer
a record of the past.
Now it's a map to the future.
And if you keep doing
it over and over again,
the hardware will become
a software program.
And who knows?
You just may start acting
like a happy person.
No magic there.
You installed the circuitry.
You may start thinking
in more unlimited ways.
Well, you primed
your brain for that.
Now, here's the tough part.
Can you teach your
body emotionally
what that future
is going to feel
like before the
actual experience?
So that doesn't mean now you're
going to wait for your success
to feel empowered.
And you're not going
to wait for your wealth
to feel abundance,
or worthiness,
or wait for your healing to
feel gratitude and wholeness,
or your new relationship
to feel love,
or the mystical
experience to feel awe.
That's kind of the old model
of reality of cause and effect,
waiting for something outside of
us to change how we feel inside
of us.
That's Newtonian physics.
But the quantum
model of reality is
about causing an
effect, which means
the moment you start
feeling abundant,
you're generating wealth.
The moment you start
feeling empowered,
you're stepping
towards your success.
The moment you start feeling
gratitude and wholeness,
your healing begins.
The moment you're
in awe of life,
you're going to have
a mystical experience.
The moment you're in
love with yourself,
you're going to find an equal.
That's causing an effect.
So then it requires
then just a reeducation.
And so the yogic
traditions, they
were contemporary
5,000 years ago.
And that language
today no longer fits.
The language to explain
this is science.
So in the workshops
we do there's
a strong element of learning
philosophy, knowledge, theory.
But then when you turn to
the person next to you,
and you explain
it, and you begin
to build the model
of understanding,
you are actually installing
the neurological hardware
in your brain in preparation
for an experience.
And the more you understand
what you're doing and why,
the how gets easier.
So you begin to
demystify the process.
That means then you've got
to modify your behaviors.
You've got to get your behaviors
to match your intentions.
You've got to begin
to personalize it.
to demonstrate it.
You've got to begin to
do something about it.
So when you initiate
that knowledge,
if you do it properly, you're
going to have a new experience.
An experience then enriches
the circuits in your brain.
And the end product
of an experience
is called an emotion.
But it's not guilt.
It's not unworthiness.
It's not anger.
It's not fear.
The moment you feel
unlimited, the moment you
feel whole, the moment
you feel worthy,
now you're teaching
your body chemically
to understand what your mind
had intellectually understood.
So you could say that
knowledge is for the mind,
and experience is for the body.
Now you're embodying the
truth of that philosophy.
And you're literally signaling
new genes in new ways,
and changing your
genetic destiny.
Now, if you've done
it once, it means
you should be able
to do it again.
And if you can repeat any
experience over and over again,
you're going to neurochemically
condition your mind and body
to begin to work as one.
And when you've done
something so many times
that your body now knows how
to do it as well as your mind,
now it's innate in you.
It's second nature.
It's easy.
It's familiar.
So then our job is to go from
philosopher, to initiate,
to master, from knowledge,
to experience, to wisdom,
from mind, to body, to
soul, from thinking,
to doing, to being, to
learning it with your head,
plying it with your hands,
and knowing it by heart.
And we have all the biological
and neurological machinery
to do it.
>> What would be your top
recommendation for people who
are maybe just starting the
work that you're sharing?
Especially when they come.
There's all these ideas that,
oh, my gosh, this sounds great.
I really want to
be supernatural.
I want to change the
way my mind thinks.
I want to create my own reality.
But everything I'm
hearing you say,
which has been
also my experience,
is it takes some serious work.
And we do get met up against
some serious resistance
of personal beliefs,
of challenges.
What would be your top
recommendation for someone
who is really
entering on this path,
and still finds
themselves really
coming up with
some serious blocks
inside of their own experience,
having to change their mind,
having depressing feelings,
having questions about it all?
>> Yeah.
Number one, never stop learning.
We have to reprogram the
way we think about reality.
When I wrote "You
Are the Placebo,"
I was so angry
with myself cause I
couldn't believe how programmed
into limitation that we are.
So this isn't something
that you do in one bite.
It takes a process.
But there's a formula.
We now know there's a formula.
And if you follow
the formula, you'll
begin to make
significant changes.
So learning.
Learn the science
of transformation.
Number two, make
time for yourself.
When you invest in yourself,
you invest in your future.
That means then in the morning
before you start your day,
ask yourself what is the
greatest ideal of myself
that I can be today?
And begin to denature the
programs of those thoughts.
And if you don't know
what those thoughts are,
sit with your eyes closed.
They'll come up.
Write them down.
The word meditation literally
means to become familiar with.
That's what it means.
When you become so familiar with
your old self, those thoughts,
those behaviors, those
emotions that you would never
go on conscious
again, now you're
the governor of your thoughts.
Now you're so familiar with
them you know they're not true.
And nerve cells that no longer
fire together, no longer
wire together.
And it takes an act of
will in the beginning.
But then if you
say I'm not going
to get up until I am this
person, this is the work.
So then you begin to
construct a future.
Now, you're believing
in your future
more than you're
believing in your past.
You're falling in
love with your future
more than you're falling
in love with your past.
You're telling a
story of your future
more than you're telling
the story of your past.
And you say, I'm not going to
get up from this meditation
until I feel like
it's already happened.
Now, is where the
rubber hits the road.
And when you get up in
a new state of being,
your job is to maintain
that modified state of mind
and body your entire day.
Independent of the
people in your life,
the conditions in your life.
Independent of however
your body feels.
And independent of time.
And doing that properly,
all of a sudden,
you start showing up
unpredictable in your life.
People start saying,
something's different about you.
What's different about you?
And you're just not
the same person.
Cause your energy is different.
Your mind and body
are different.
And your brain and
body are literally
in the future
instead of the past.
And people are doing
it all over the world.
The side effect is
tremendous healing, new jobs,
new relationships,
new opportunities,
mystical experiences,
the stuff we
deserve to have in our lives.
>> So Dr. Joe, will you give
us a tip that people can use
anywhere at any time to start
to implement some of these
concepts that you shared with us
today to make lasting changes,
and reprogramming and
getting out of this thinking,
feeling loop?
>> Sure.
When you change your breath,
you change your brainwaves.
It's really simple.
Sit down.
Close your eyes.
Slow your breath down.
Place your attention
in your heart.
That's where your
elevated emotions start.
When your heart begins
to open, and you
start to feel elevated
emotions, like gratitude, joy,
or inspiration, and you breathe
and feel those emotions,
the heart begins to beat
in a more rhythmic fashion.
And it begins to produce a very,
very measurable magnetic field.
That energy is a frequency.
And all frequency
carries information.
So as you begin to elevate
your emotional state,
you're literally
changing your physiology.
When you begin to feel elevated,
that energy carries a thought.
So lay the intent of some
experience you want to have.
Now, that means then, when
you combine a clear intention
with an elevated
emotion, you're literally
changing your energetic field.
When there's a vibrational
match between your energy
and some potential in the
future, all of a sudden now
you don't have to go
anywhere to get anything.
You start to see it come to you.
So take a couple breaths.
Slow your breathing down.
Bring up an elevated
emotion, if you have to do it
connected to somebody
or something,
until you can feel
it with your heart.
Feel it within you
and all around you.
And then all of a sudden,
lay the intent of something
you want to experience in your
future, and see what happens.
Be the scientist and
experiment with it.
>> Well, Dr. Joe, thank you
so much for being here today.
Really appreciate
the conversation.
And thank you for
all of the work
that you're doing out
there in the world
to help empower people
on this path of healing
and transformation.
I look forward to talking
again sometime soon.
>> Thank you.
Thank you so much.
>> Thanks for being here.
And I will see you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]